--- 
title: The Right Due Date 
---

_Disclaimer: I'm not a doctor. This is not medical advice, just my interpretation of the facts. Think for yourself before trusting a
stranger on the internet._

## Short Version

When you find out you're pregnant, tell your doctors that you don't remember when your last period was. Then schedule an
ultrasound between 8 and 9 weeks after your last period to establish your due date. You'll get a more accurate date and you'll be
significantly less likely to be artificially induced because your pregnancy is considered late.

## Long Version

If you want to minimize the odds of having your labor artificially induced, getting the right due date is very important. There are serious
medical risks to a "post-term" (over 42 weeks) pregnancy. If you're merely 41 weeks pregnant, it's usually not concerning.  Once you cross
into post-term territory, and roughly 10% of women do, the medical professionals taking care of you will likely become a lot more anxious
and will push to induce labor. So a difference of a few days on your due date may matter a great deal.

There are two common ways to establish the due date: counting forward from the first day of the mother's last menstrual period (LMP), and
getting an ultrasound. According to the [latest guidelines](
https://www.acog.org/Clinical-Guidance-and-Publications/Committee-Opinions/Committee-on-Obstetric-Practice/Methods-for-Estimating-the-Due-Date)
from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), a first trimester ultrasound is the gold standard, and the earlier in
the trimester, the more accurate it is. However, ultrasounds before eight weeks run the risk of a fetus that's too small to measure. So
**the very best time to do your ultrasound is between 8 and 9 weeks after the first day of your last menstrual period**. If you can't get it
scheduled for that exact window, do it as soon afterwards as you can. Anytime up to 14 weeks is fine, but sooner is better.

<!-- In one study, 40% of women had their due date adjusted because their LMP-derived date was more than 5 days off from their ultrasound
date. The study [concluded](https://www.ajog.org/article/S0002-9378%2803%2901932-X/abstract) that "the application of a program of first
trimester ultrasound screening to a low-risk obstetric population results in a significant reduction in the rate of labor induction for
postterm pregnancy." -->

Where this gets weird is that the ACOG also recommends that as soon as a due date is established (whether by LMP or ultrasound), it should
be entered into the medical record and should not be changed except in "rare circumstances". Specifically, it should only be updated when
the ultrasound disagrees with the LMP date by a significant margin. The required discrepancy is typically 7+ days, but it varies based on
when the ultrasound was done. So you can end up in a situation where your LMP date is off by almost a week from your ultrasound date, yet
the less accurate date is used.

The solution is to make sure your ultrasound date becomes the official date. Simply asking your doctor won't work. They will most likely
refuse to deviate from the ACOG guidelines because it opens them up to a potential lawsuit down the road (and lawsuits are already super
common in obstetrics). 

Instead, my recommendation is to avoid revealing your LMP date. Be prepared to be asked when your last period was, and respond that you
weren't paying attention and you don't remember (this is way more common than you think). Then schedule your ultrasound during the right
timeframe, and you'll be all set.
